is Israel's war on Gaza now spilling
over into the occupied West Bank Israeli
forces have conducted their largest
assault in decades killing and injuring
dozens of Palestinians the escalation is
coupled with increasing settler violence
so what are the consequences this is
Inside Story
[Music]
hello there I'm James Bay on Wednesday
Israeli forces launched a large scale
military operation in the occupied West
Bank for days they've carried out drone
strikes and hundreds of troops of storm
cities and refugee camps Israel insists
it's targeting Fighters but Palestinians
say it's attacking homes and civilian
infrastructure the escalation is Raising
fears that the war on Gaza is spreading
into other pal inan territories so will
the assault open another military front
for Israel we'll explore all this with
our guests in a moment but first this
report from Kata Lopez
hodan the scale and scope of the latest
Israeli assaults marked the largest
military operation in the occupied West
Bank in more than two
decades troops accompanied by armored
vehicles drones and bulldozers stormed
four Northern cities and refugee camps
tearing up roads roads and destroying
infrastructure homes left to burn now
line the streets of these Palestinian
neighborhoods me civil defense teams
came to put out the fire but Israeli
forces didn't let them through we broke
the bathroom window and managed to get
out my wife's shoulder and arm were
burned thank God that was
all Palestinians say the frustration is
overwhelming this house belongs to an
old woman they destroyed it there were
walls and a road here they destroyed
them my relative's house was damaged
with missiles and
drones Israel says it's targeting
Palestinian armed factions with links to
Iran and what it describes as
counterterrorism operations we have
evidence of Iranian trying to smuggle
weapons and we have seen Rising Terror
attacks in Israel so we take the
measures necessary to pre prent Terror
activities in
Israel the day long assault on the
occupied West Bank is Raising fears that
Israel's war on Gaza could escalate
regionally Israel is already preparing
for teran's promised retaliation after
the assassination of Hamas political
leader isma Han and its exchanges of
fire with Hezbollah along the border
with Lebanon have
intensified we must expand the goals of
the war and include the safe return of
Israel's Northern residents to their
homes on the Northern Lebanon border
safely an increase in il legal
settlements is also fueling tensions
more than 700,000 Israeli settlers live
in the occupied West Bank and violence
against Palestinians has risen since
October the 7th the eu's foreign policy
Chief Joseph Burell is calling for
sanctions a suggestion backed by some
leaders we will be supporting y perel's
um recommendation for sanctions uh in
respect of uh settler organizations in
the West Bank who were fermenting and
who were facilitating expansion of
settlements all these developments cast
out on the chances of reaching an
agreement for a ceasefire in Gaza and
the release of captives Kia Lopez oan Al
jazer for insight
story well let's discuss all of this in
much more detail with today's panel of
guests and today we have from West
Jerusalem manaram Klein he's a professor
of political science at bar Elan
University in the Jordanian Capital am
man is tahani Mustafa senior Palestine
Analyst at the international crisis
group and in rala abas milhem the
executive director of the Palestinian
Farmers Union his family farm was
attacked by Israeli settlers last year
so let's start our discussion on what's
been going on in recent days in the West
Bank um let's go first to you abas
because you are our panelist who's there
in the West Bank I know that you are in
uh rala and most of this has been
happening in the in in the northern part
of the West Bank but tell me what does
it feel like there because this we're
told is the largest Israeli offensive
since 2002 which is when um the then
prime minister Ariel shiron took over
the major cities of the West Bank during
the second
inter it's worse than 20 too absolutely
I mean it's like an entire Invasion and
attacks against everything in West Bank
it's the Army and the settlers who are
doing these invasions and these attacks
you know targeting most of the farming
communities and Farmers across their
entire Farmland areas across West Bank
from Janine in the South till from sorry
from hon in the South till Janine in the
north yes I'm based in ramala but my
farm and my family I'm from Janina
actually working in ramala because I'm
the director the union but my farmlands
and my family farmlands and my town is
in Janine area that has been under
ongoing attacks and violence by settlers
and regular and repeated invasions by
Israeli Army since October 7 until now
although the Israeli attacks against
Farmers did not start from October 7 but
was intensified after October 7 the
attacks before October 7 against Farmers
from settlers was three attacks per day
but now the average of the attacks are
11 attacks against Farmers per per day
and these attacks have resulted in
direct killings of farmers in their farm
land like what happened with a farmer
who part of the Union in aaia town
between ramala and naos who was shot in
the chest and killed by a group of
settlers while this farmer was
harvesting his Olive crops last year
other Farmers from surra town near
Nablus while plowing their Farmland they
were killed also by settlers in addition
to other tens of farmers and farming
communities who were attacked severely
by settlers groups who are doing these
attacks under the full protection of the
Israeli Army and then and finan and
supported financially by the Ministry of
Finance that is run by a sitler leader
in the Israeli government who is so Mish
so the situation in West Bank is more
Beyond and more difficult and more
complex than the one in 200 too where
let me bring in monar let me bring in
manaram in West Jerusalem abas has made
it clear this has been going on for many
many months uh in the last few days
though a major military operation um
Israel is saying it's planning to Target
what it calls armed terrorists who pose
a threat to security forces explain to
me what you understand is the objective
or aim of Israel's
operation Israel trying to regain
control over the West Bank the pa the
the Palestinian Authority lost any
control over the area from South up to
the north and already before October 7
there was a a small Uprising in the
Northwest Bank against both Mahmud abas
PA regime and
Israel the in the in the name of the
close
cooperation between the PA and Israeli
security
yes the PA have been seriously weakened
by Israel have they
not the the Israeli the Israeli goal is
to control the area and actually it
reminds me what happened in Gaza strep
before the this war there were small
raids since
2007 into the Gaza Street and the the
photos that we see from tul reminds us
what is going on in the Gaza strep the
destruction and the violence that the
Israeli Army uses and in Gaza the method
in a small scale is implemented in the
North in the Northwest
Bank it is it it is a red flag showing
what may happen in the next stage okay
at the beginning of the program in
Catcher's report we heard the claims of
the Recycled ambassador to the United
Nations for Israel Danny Donan now back
in his old job that Israel Iran is
supplying Palestinian
with their weapons that is something
putting everything at the hands of Iran
that I've heard many times from Mr Danon
having had dealings with him myself toan
what do you make of those claims well
look Israel has long talked up the
threat of Iran to itself to us interests
in the region and yes these groups may
be uh receiving financial support from
Iran uh however their Logistics are
coming from in in some instances
Israel's allies in the region like
Jordan for example uh they may be
getting some of it from Lebanon from
Hezbollah
uh you know it's it's irrelevant in
terms of where they're actually getting
their Logistics from these organizations
are not Iranian puppets they are their
own organizations and there is a context
that is effectively leading to their
reestablishment in September these
groups were practically ineffective uh
in some cases they were non-existent in
places like Naas Janine they were
severely weakened through targeted
assassinations arrests today they have
managed to reestablish themselves and
that is precisely because uh of the the
severe level of violence that these
communities are facing these groups take
a very def defensive posture that is
what they are they are Community defense
mechanisms that are pushing back against
the violence an occupation now Israel
thinks that it can reestablish a sense
of security that it lost on the 7th of
October by acting preemptively the way
that it is by creating the kind of
violence that we're seeing uh on more
localized levels in the West Bank that
we're seeing in Gaza uh Israeli
ministers have made no secret about this
they've actually come out and openly
stated that they do intend to create uh
sort of mini GSA scenarios across the
West Bank you know this is coming from
very senior levels the Finance Minister
uh for instance has openly stated that
they intend to do just
that Ambassador Danon who I just
mentioned was speaking uh in his answer
at the UN in reply to a question from Al
jaer one that he deliberately
sidestepped and that was about comments
of us that were made by Israel cats the
Israeli foreign minister on X he said we
need to deal with a threat exactly as we
deal with Terror infrastru structure in
Gaza including the temporary evacuation
of Palestinian civilians and other steps
needed abas what do you make of that the
idea they're going to start moving large
parts of the population in the West Bank
potentially what there government is
doing in West Bank is exactly
implementing their own policy of
annexation of the land and transferring
of
Palestinian this has been announced by
the Netanyahu government in 2020 when he
was calling for the annexation and
imposing the Israeli law on the West
Bank area it's not something new it's
not yes but we Haven you've seen what's
happened in Gaza entire parts of the
population constantly on the Move forced
evacuations how fearful are you that
that sort of thing is coming to the West
Bank they are doing the same and this is
with what they publicly sit in their
even Facebook pages saying that we will
do exactly what we are doing in Gaza
at the time when this genocidal work war
is happening in Gaza there is an ethnic
cleansing War occurring in West Bank
although the war is focusing on Gaza in
terms of this massive destruction of
every living and L living there in Gaza
the eyes of the Israeli government and
the settlers are on the West Bank land
they want the land empty from Farmers
and empty from people to do so they are
imposing and conducting all types of
crimes there and I'm I'm really shocked
to to listen to your guest from West
Jerusalem saying that it is because
those inine doing so and so the question
why those people are doing so it is
because the occupation is still there
since 75 years until now those people
are resisting and their message and the
message of the entire Palestinian people
is no more occupation in West Bank no
more settlements in West Bank this land
is an occupied land and the land is
owned by Palestinians and from the time
when Palestinians accepted this
historical con and signed the oso
agreement until now what we have gained
was loss and loss of our land for the s
for the s for the sake of settlement
expansion this government does not
believe in peace do not recognize
Palestinian Independence right do not
recognize even the existence of
Palestinians as a human beings here what
they have committed engine tarim toas
and different parts in North North area
of West is exactly what they are doing
in Gaza it's the same policy the same
killing machine that they are using in
Gaza are using in West Bank and yes the
fear among Palestinians in West Bank is
on the high level they know that they
are witnessing more and more massacres
not only by the Army but also by the
settlers who are protected and supported
by the Army as well and the eyes is to
Annex and impose the full control in the
Palestinian land and they are justifies
they are using no nothing can justify
the killing of 40,000 people in Gaza
where half of them are women and
children nothing can justify controlling
and stealing destroying all agricultural
farm lands in West Bank for I I don't
know for for what lies they are using I
mean it's worth noting that the points
you made on occupation are actually now
backed by the top Court in the UN system
the international court of justice uh
with its ruling in July monar I'm
telling to you
I am still despite what you all told me
a little confused about the timing of
this current escalation by Israel
because if you look at what Israel
currently has on its plate it's still
fighting in Gaza it's leadership is
still supposed to be involved in
detailed seesar negotiations so those
those seem to have paused for the moment
only days ago there was the heaviest
exchange of um of fire between Israel
and hisbah in Le and still pending we
have the threat of Iranian retaliation
for the assassination in tran of Ismael
hania the Hamas leader so why now is
Israel
acting Israel operates in the West
Bank bases on intelligence collection
and op operation uh
opportunities and whenever it is
possible is
Israel operates Israel does not take
into
consideration the Western word protest
and the anger and it Israel feels that
it has freeh hand to do whatever she
wants in the West Bank and promote some
radical hopes and visions of its
government
ministers they they plan to do in the
West Bank what they did in Gaza they
started with small
portions they do they few weeks
ago they did the same near
Jericho expulsion of weakened population
happened in the Jordan Valley and South
Hill
Hebron the the problem with
the Israeli from Israeli perspective the
problem of the Northwest Bank the
refugee camps is different so they need
to build up big army
units and destroy the roads the roads
leading into and connecting different
areas within the refugee camp and the
city
and be there stay there for two days
three days before going back to the
state of Israel this is the if I can
bring you in tahan if I can bring you in
as you just heard from monim there he
said Israel is acting on intelligence um
we've seen that various Palestinian
Fighters have died including uh it seems
some commanders including the commander
of the taram Battalion of Palestinian
Islamic Jihad do you think there is a
deliberate Target list
here I mean look Israel has never been
able to substantiate a lot of the
evidence it supposedly has uh and
there's never been any pressure on it to
do so right it is able to go into these
areas conduct targeted supposed targeted
assassinations um arrests uh it can go
in literally raise local sorry local
communities to the ground which is what
it's doing by the way this isn't just
about targeting supposed uh uh
resistance infrastructure I mean if
you're talking about targeting health
workers mosques um uh schools uh
hospitals these are not supposed uh
resistance infrastructures and they've
not been able to provide any substantial
proof that any of the people that they
are looking for uh are actually
operating from those areas um so you
know it is again very much taking the
Israeli sort of PR talking points at
face value and then having them
completely unscrutinized but what we're
actually seeing on the ground is
something far more far far worse sorry
uh than what Israel is claiming it is
doing now as I said earlier these groups
set themselves up as a community defense
mechanism they try to protect their
communities when uh Israel sorry when
Israel does conduct uh its incursions
which often do come uh with Palestinian
fatalities and often at times it's not
just resistance Fighters that get caught
up and I'm not going to call it
Crossfire because it's often uh
Palestinian civilians that get caught up
in a lot of the targets uh that Israel
claims that it's uh that it's supposedly
aiming at um you know can I can I just
drill down on who these Palestinian
Fighters are exactly because in the past
in the northern part of the West Bank
they would have been the alaxa mar
Brigade I think which would have been um
allied with fata there was a group
called Lion's Den but now we have
Palestinian Islamic Jihad of operating
as well in the West Bank and Hamas I
mean do these labels matter anymore or
and any rivalries between these groups
or is it or are they all working
together now a matter of
survival this is a matter of survival
look these groups established themselves
in 2021 as a matter of survival they
when you talk about the Lions Den the
Janine brigades uh the tul karum
Battalion uh you know even even now the
the latest group that set themselves up
do know like these are all cross
alliance-based groups these and by the
way primarily their membership actually
stems not from the most extremist
elements in Palestinian Society they're
often coming from more leftist secular
elements like fet for example is a lot
of this has to do with the fact that
Fat's Grassroots have lost faith in
their own partner in their in their own
political tier where they do not feel
like their own party speaks for them can
resonate with the reality that they live
under uh and therefore have had to turn
to more radical elements like Hamas and
Islamic Jihad to try and get the
logistics and support that they need to
fight an occupation this is a matter of
survival and that's exactly what these
groups are they don't really have an
identity in and of themselves they don't
have a clear uh command structure they
you know ultimately there is is no
identity in and of themselves that comes
out of these groups they are cross
allianc a mish mash of of different um
uh fact political factions individuals
that have joined for their own rationale
but what does unite them what is holding
this momentum together uh is is is their
fight against an occupation an
occupation by the Israeli military but
also abas the settlers the incitement
the harassment of the settlers often
with collusion from the Israeli authori
the Israeli courts and the Israeli
militaries um you yourself had your own
Farm attacked at the end of last year by
settlers yeah it's not only me I'm one
among tens of farmers in my town in jine
area called kuur where most of the land
Kota Cod is classified as area B which
is supposed to be under the control of
the Palestinian Authority and despite
that Sans have attacked like 13,000 dams
which is almost 4,000 Acres of these
land the restricting the access of all
Palestinian farmers who owning the land
in that area including my own farm and
my family farm from October 7 until now
we had been unable to get access to that
land and it is a Farmland a farm land of
olive crops and last year Harvest we
couldn't even Harvest our crops and now
we are approaching the coming Olive
season in Palestine and all these
farmers in my town and as as well as so
many hundreds of farmers in other areas
are are really uh uh scaring not to be
able to to harvest this ol their Olive
crops this year uh due to Settler's
attacks and settler violence and
settlers controlling the land it's not
only area C it's area B and even parts
of area
a let me bring you in on on on the
settlers none of them are supposed to be
there according to International law and
that was reaffirmed uh by the
international court of justice in in the
last month or so but despite that if
Israel wanted it could Reign these
people in couldn't it the Israeli Army
and the the settlers are
Incorporated they are the same unit they
are the same Administration what the
international criminal court got it and
the uh the American Administration
get it very very wrong they sanction
individuals instead of sanctions the
state and the state is behind it they
they form up the same entity with two
different
arms um so that that's that's the
problem H here the the settlers or the
violent settlers are not individuals
implementing
attack against the Army Vision or the
Army code of operation and the in the
contrary the Army is there and does
nothing in order to protect the
Palestinians okay to on that point we
had fresh sanctions against settlements
from the US state department on
Wednesday they sanctioned an NGO that it
said provided material support for
settlements and one individual in one
settlement who was a security
coordinator as manaram says these are
not separate the Israeli State and the
settlers but the US is saying they are
separate is that a deliberate Mistake by
the us because they know that if they
admitted that Israel was behind the
whole settler project uh then they would
have to think about stopping all
military aid to Israel which is
something that this Administration the
Biden Administration it seems uh if she
is elected uh as president Harris don't
want to
do that's precisely it uh the the US is
very much well aware that this is
something that goes well beyond a few
hundred settlers that this is a
systematic state sponsored problem where
you have courts the IDF uh that a bet
sometimes joins into joins in with this
violence today we have the obscuring of
the lines between settler and Soldier
considering that many of those settlers
that are repeat offenders known to the
security establishment are now Dawning
military uniforms and the US is very
well aware of this these the the
supposed sanctioning regime that uh the
US is boasting about in terms of trying
to to present itself as though it's
trying to remedy or do something about
the issue of settler violence that's
been fueling the crisis in the West Bank
it's completely bogus they came up with
this idea back in 2023 and at the time
uh under the support of the US state
department those that were trying to
formulate and implement this sanctions
regime knew that it was a total failure
they knew that it wouldn't address the
problem they knew very well that this
was a systematic problem the reason why
they decided to go ahead with it was to
prove to those back in DC that refused
at that time to try and push for any
kind of political process thinking that
you could maintain the status quo that
many on the ground including their own
practitioners Affiliated to the UN US
security coordinator the US state
department were warning uh was
unsustainable so they they were very
much aware that this this sanctions
regime was a policy that was not going
to that is not going to remedy the issue
what they were trying to do was to
exhaust all Technical Solutions so that
they could go back to DC and make it
very clear that right now is the time to
start implementing political pressure
specifically on Israel that was
absolutely adamant on not pursuing any
diplomatic route with the Palestinians
thank you all three of you for your time
today our guests manaram kleim tahani
Mustafa and abas milham Al jazer has
teams reporting across the occupied West
Bank and on the ground in Gaza stay
tuned for extensive coverage past
comprehens ensive analysis on
al.com if you have comments about the
program post them on Facebook you'll
find us at
facebook.com/ AJ Inside Story or use x
while we are at AJ insid story from me
James bays and the team here please stay
safe I'll see you again very soon
bye-bye for
[Music]
now make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from aler